---
layout: post
title: "Date test"
subtitle: "Bug test"
date: 2025-01-02 17:23:21
tags: ["Thoughts", "VU"]
---


Back in high school, I used to think that university would be educational paradise, thought by subject experts. And although I genuinly enjoy learning from my professors, I've been a bit disappointed by the differing teaching skills of my professors. 

This is not the professors’ fault. After all, as students, we want to learn from experts at the cutting edge of their fields. However, we also want those experts to be great teachers. This is where the Dutch higher educational system has some misaligned incentives. 

Take the VU for example. Professors are evaluated primarily on their research output. The quality and quantity of their research determine how much time they’re allocated for research, with teaching filling the rest of their contracted hours. Essentially, teaching becomes a mandatory nuisance—a task to complete rather than a priority.

Another issue is the lack of didactic training for university professors. While secondary school teachers go through rigorous teaching programs to develop classroom skills, the path to becoming a university lecturer is entirely academic.
https://nl.indeed.com/carrieregids/baan-vinden/hoe-word-je-hoogleraar
 While I admire the academic prowess of my professors, perhaps it’s time to rethink how much teaching preparation they receive.

Loosening some constraints on university teaching might also help. Many general introductory courses—like academic skills, statistics, or calculus—don’t necessarily require a world-renowned researchers. I’ve had the privilege of learning mathematics from a rare professor who had a full-time teaching role, and was nominated for best teacher. Prioritizing teaching quality can make a difference. Maybe not all courses need to be taught by field experts; instead, some could benefit from being led by expert teachers.


Finally, the feedback loop for teaching is completely broken. There was a time when students had to fill out paper evaluations directly after their exams, rating the course, the professor, and the exam itself. While this wasn’t perfect, the response rate was consistently above 90%. Now, with the online evaluation system evalytics, response rates have plummeted to under 8% —sometimes with fewer than five students providing feedback for an entire course. This shift to online has crippled feedback mechanisms for professors, but also for the oversight boards like the OLC, which are supposed to monitor educational quality.

Without proper feedback or external incentives, professors might do “just enough” to avoid being flagged by the broken system and continue their research. Luckily, many of my professors are intrisnsically motivated. However, relying on their goodwill is not sustainable. Hopefully we can align intrests and incentives, benifiting both the students and the educators. 